---
layout: post
title:  "My Session at New Stars of Data 2021"
categories: 
tags: 
---

I had the privilege of presenting at the virtual [New Stars of Data 2021 conference][1] last week.  The conference organizers recently uploaded all of the sessions to YouTube, so I thought I'd post the link here in case any folks following this blog want to check it out.

## Abstract

The session is titled:

**What the EF? Common ORM Problems and How to Fix Them**

Here's the abstract:

> Are you a DBA who sees ORM queries causing performance fires on a daily basis?
> 
> Are you a developer who sees the ORM as a black box you have no control over?
> 
> Do you want to learn how to fix these problems yourself, or how to communicate the fix to your colleagues?
> 
> In this session I'll cover what the most common and painful ORM query issues are, show why they're problematic, and teach you how to fix them.
> 
> You'll learn that you have more control than you think over the queries generated by these tools. In many cases, the fix is simple - you just have to know which buttons to press. Sometimes a little more creativity is required - even modifying the generated T-SQL text on the fly!

## Video

<iframe width="560" height="315" 
    src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/ld8_5BH2_U8" 
    frameborder="0" 
    allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" 
    allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

## Conclusion

Thanks again to William and Ben for organizing the conference, and giving me a fun opportunity to share my experiences with Entity Framework queries in a new medium outside of this blog 😃

[1]: https://www.newstarsofdata.com/